---
layout: "post"
title: "the season of the cut"
categories: fgmstories
permalink: the-season-of-the-cut
---

The season of the cut
By Fardosa Mahamad

According to a report by World Health Organization female genital cutting also known as female genital mutilation (FGM) and female circumcision is practiced in twenty eight countries of sub-Saharan Africa, a few countries in the Middle East and Asia, and among immigrant population in Europe, North America and Australia. As many as 100-140 million girls undergo the practice, and at least two million girls are at risk of being cut each year, about six thousand girls a day.
The Somali community living in Kenya (and in their native Somalia) has practiced Female circumcision for centuries. Oral tales have been cited by members of this community that trace the practice to Egyptian traders who brought it to Northern Somalia, from where it spread to the rest of the region. Pharaonic circumcision also known as infibulation was thought to have been started by a legendary woman ruler in Northern Somalia, Arawelo, who was known to castrate men and sew up women to suppress their sexual desire as a form of punishment.
FGM among the Somali is a behavior determined and sustained primarily at the family level to ensure social acceptability and status within the community in which its daughters marry. Thus as long as FGM is seen as not only socially acceptable but also as critical for family to have any status in the Somali community, it is in the interest of both the woman and the man in a family to sustain the practice. A source who seeks anonymity says that her two daughters face constant ridicule from her peers for not going through the cut. She however says that “I will not let the society dictate what makes my daughters suitable for marriage”.
Research conducted by Population Council’s Frontiers in Reproductive Health Program (FRONTIERS) shows that several reasons were used to justify continuation of female genital circumcision by the Somali; cultural tradition that brings honor for the family and girl; means of controlling female sexuality; perceived requirement of Islam; necessary condition for marriage; and genital beauty and cleanliness
WHO has identified four types of FGM, which in Kenya can be classified into two broad categories of FGM: type one and two which involves the cutting or removal of the entire clitoris, and in most cases, the adjacent parts of the labia minora (small lips) and sometimes all of the external genitalia, except parts of the labia majora (large lips). This is the most prevalent type of female genital cutting in Africa including Kenya. The other category is type three (sometimes known as Pharaonic circumcision or infibulations) which is the most severe form of FGM in which the entire clitoris and labia minora are cut away and the labia majora are thinly sliced or scraped and the raw surfaces either stitched together or sealed. This is practiced in Sudan, Somalia, parts of Ethiopia, Southern Egypt, and by some groups in Northern Kenya as well as parts of West Africa such as Mali.
The term clitoridectomy is an anatomical description, which refers to the removal of the clitoris (i.e. type one and two). The term sunna is sometimes used by Islamic cultures, with the intention to describe type one cutting. However, this term is also used in Islam to cover a range of religious values and requirements more generally and although some communities may perceive female circumcision to be a religious obligation this is not the case, because mainstream teaching of sunna has neither commanded, prohibited nor recommended this practice. A sheikh at a local mosque in Embakasi says “there is no passage in the Quran that talks about FGM. “As a religious leader I believe that a woman has a right over her own body and no one should dictate her”. The sheikh insists that “communities that believe that girls who do not go through FGM are non believers should know that there is no evidence of such claims in the Quran.
 Virginity at marriage is extremely highly valued in Somali culture and therefore the un-excised girl is believed to have an overactive and uncontrollable sex drive so that she is likely to lose her virginity prematurely, to disgrace her family and damage her chances of marriage, and to become a menace to all men and to her community as a whole. The belief is that the uncut clitoris will grow big and pressure on this organ will arouse intense desires. According to a source who seeks anonymity, “Somali men do not want to marry girls who have not been cut and stitched up because they will not be able to control them”. “Their sexual enjoyment does not matter so long as their men are happy” 
The decision making process is mostly influenced by the girl’s mother and grandmother. Mothers are considered to be lifelong guardians of their daughters and all responsibilities for her lies on the mother as long as she is alive. Men relatives have hardly any influence on whether a girl will be cut or not, or on the types of cut the girl should undergo. “I am the one who makes the decision on who among my daughter has qualified to go through the cut every season, although I inform their father about it”, say a source who seeks anonymity.  In the Somali community, traditional practitioners perform the procedure; these are usually older women in the community who specialize in this task, and often include traditional birth attendants. There is growing evidence, however, that medical practitioners and other health staff in Kenya are increasingly engaging in FGM. 
A study among health workers who serve the Somali community found that three out of the 18 interviewed in North Eastern Province and 15 out of 26 in Nairobi reported having been approached to perform FGM.  Medical staff working among the Somali community appear to also be involved in the practice of re-infibulating women after delivery. Many nurses and midwives reported that, following delivery, they were sometimes requested by the woman to re-stitch her vulva so as to re-create the reduced opening.
In an interview with a health practitioner who performs FGM in Nairobi and who sought anonymity as the practise can earn her a long prison sentence—3 years or a fine of Sh200,000 or both— explains why she continues to carry out the cut.
 “Families in Nairobi pay Sh2,000 for every girl we cut. They offer to pay for these services.I do not do it for the money but to ensure that the girls do not suffer from needless pain. I also provide the girls with medication and the proper care needed to prevent medical complication. This is better than what these girls might go through under a traditional cutter,” she says.
Unlike other communities where FGM is considered a right of passage— from adolescent to womanhood— among the Somali community, the cut is not a rite of passage requiring socially endorsed behaviors. Most of the girls are prebuscencent with girls as young as eight years being cut. What is important is that the girl is cut prior to puberty; by whom, how, and where are not important.
There are no ceremonies, rituals or orientation for adulthood that accompany or provide the framework for the cutting. Unlike other communities, FGM has no role as a preparation for marriage, rite of passage, or a transition to adulthood.
According to WHO, the range of health complications associated with FGM are wide and some are severely disabling. The most immediate physical complications of FGM include severe pain due to the operation being performed with crude instruments and without anesthetic; hemorrhages associated with excision of the clitoris; shock as a result of sudden loss of blood and infection.
Some examples of psychological effects of FGM among girls include; the feeling of betrayal, bitterness and anger at being subjected to such an ordeal, even if they receive support from their families immediately following the procedure. Girls who have not been excised may be socially stigmatized, rejected by the community, and unable to marry locally, which may also cause psychological trauma. 
Sexual problems as a result of FGM can affect both partners in marriage, from fear of the first sexual intercourse onwards, and create great anxiety. Excised women may suffer painful sexual intercourse because of narrow vaginal opening and complications such as infection. Inhibition of coitus because of fear of pain may damage the marital relationship and even lead to divorce.
FGM is seen internationally as a violation of many women’s and children’s rights, such as health, to be free from gender discrimination, to life, and to freedom from torture including the inherent dignity of the person, the right to liberty and security of the person, and the right to privacy. Only by acknowledging that the subjection of girls and women to FGM is an act of control and gender discrimination that compromises the enjoyment of their fundamental rights and freedoms can communities begin to recognize and deal with FGM as a serious violation of human rights that requires redress.  
According to a report by FRONTIER, there is a wide feeling expressed that the movement to encourage the abandonment of FGM is driven by western interests, with the aim of forcing the Somalis to forsake their traditional culture and become absorbed into a westernized culture. Consequently, future interventions to encourage FGM abandonment in the Somali community will need to ensure the explicit support of political, religious and cultural leaders to counter these perceptions.